---
author: Christy Maver
brief: In our recent manuscript, titled Why Does the Neocortex Have Layers and Columns,
A Theory of Learning the 3D Structure of the World, we introduced a new theory of how the
brain makes predictive models of objects.  We proposed that the brain pairs sensory data
with location data to perform object recognition. After reading our manuscript, a friend of
the company, Hans-Poul Veldhuyzen van Zanten, emailed us with the observation that our
theory was compatible with an ancient memorization system known as the “method of loci.”
date: 2017/08/28
hideImage: false
image: ../images/holes-2428676_1280.jpg
org: VP of Marketing
tags: numenta hierarchical temporal memory htm blog
title: "The Method of Loci"
type: post
---

In our recent manuscript, titled [Why Does the Neocortex Have Layers and Columns,
A Theory of Learning the 3D Structure of the World](https://doi.org/10.1101/162263),
we introduced a new theory of how the brain makes predictive models of objects.
We proposed that the brain pairs sensory data with location data to perform object recognition.
After reading our manuscript, a friend of the company, Hans-Poul Veldhuyzen van Zanten,
emailed us with the observation that our theory was compatible with an ancient memorization
system known as the “method of loci.”

The [method of loci](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_of_loci) is a memory enhancement
technique that combines visualization with spatial memory of familiar environments in order
to quickly recall information.  It works like this:
> Imagine you have a list of items you want to memorize. The list could
> be anything: numbers, words, faces, etc. To use the method of loci,
> you would think of a familiar space—something where you can easily
> draw up the layout of the space in your mind. Maybe it’s your house,
> or your favorite street of shops. For this example, we’ll use a house.
> To commit your list of items to memory, you imagine walking through
> your house and stopping at various locations. At each stop, you
> mentally assign an item on the list to a location by forming an image
> of the item and some feature of that location. Then when you want to
> retrieve this list, you would imagine walking through your house, and
> as you move from room to room, you recall the items on the list.

This technique dates back to ancient Greek and Roman times, but many memory champions
still use this method today in contests that require recalling long lists of unrelated items.
While it may sound like something best reserved for those who want to impress with a cool
memory “trick,” there’s an underlying concept here that applies to everyone.

Yes, even for those of us who are not memory champs, we are still able to remember and recall
enormous amounts of information, seemingly without effort.  If I asked you to think about your
house right now, you could imagine it instantly.  If I asked you to describe your kitchen, you
could tell me how it’s laid out, where you store the cups, which drawer contains the
silverware, where the refrigerator is located. You could describe to me, in great detail,
this environment that you know very well.  But what you may not realize is that your
knowledge of this space is associated with a location, and it’s the association with a
location that allows you to remember and recall large amount of information more easily.  
When I ask you to picture your refrigerator, you do not recall an isolated image of your
refrigerator, as if it came up in an online product search. No, you recall it as it exists,
where it exists, in your kitchen.

If you’ve read our latest manuscript, you’ll recall that location was the “missing ingredient”
that explained how the brain integrates movement with sensory input.  The brain always pairs
sensory data with location data. This is how we learn and recognize objects.  It’s how we
build a model of the world.  It’s why we can learn and remember vast amounts of information
very quickly.  And when we explore what this means, we reach a surprising yet fascinating
conclusion: The vast majority of knowledge we have about objects in the world only exists in
the context of a location.
